https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rvwugeJDUZc
Why can't I get any movement in my life? But it might be more accurate to say, why can't I get any movement in me? >> Uh How often do you get angry? >> Hm? >> How often do you get angry? >> Probably about 70 80% of the time. >> So you're angry a lot. >> Yeah. >> Are you angry in a way that feels good or you in angry in a way that creates shame? >> Usually shame. >> Got you. >> Once or twice I've been able to let it flow and I actually felt great. But yeah, for the rest of the time it's like something here just constricts and holds. I can't get it to stop doing that. >> Right. So you get angry at somebody hurt somebody. Is that what creates the shame? What creates the shame in the anger? >> I I get more angry at my myself. >> Oh, I see. >> I I try not to lash out at people cuz I don't want to do that, but >> So you have an internal dialogue that's just really abusive. >> It's relentless. >> Cool. I want you to say everything that you say to yourself, but I want you to say it to me. And I want you to use Joe at the beginning of every sentence. So if you say to yourself >> Okay. >> God damn it, Joe. You If you say to yourself, "God damn it, uh why don't you like get more exercise?" I want you to say, "God damn it, Joe. Why don't you get more exercise?" I want you to be in the tone of it. And that like the whole thing. Just like be exactly like the voice in your head, but put it all at me. >> Oh boy. >> I'll tell you when to stop. And make sure you use my name every sentence. >> Okay. >> Um >> Well, Joe, can you not get a single [ __ ] thing right? Can you not ever just get it right just one time? One [ __ ] thing. Hm. Joe, years of You've been doing this for [ __ ] years, and here you are same place. Nothing has moved in your life. I mean, Joe, can you just not do one [ __ ] thing right? Anything. One goddamn thing. Anything. Please, Joe, please, one [ __ ] thing. Just Jesus Christ, Joe. Handle your [ __ ] already, for God's sake. How many [ __ ] years do you have to do this before it it you actually get somewhere with it? Hurry the [ __ ] up. >> Awesome. Great. How did that feel? >> Weird. To say it out loud. I I'm not with anyone when I >> Yeah. >> berate him, so. >> How did it feel to say it to me? >> Slightly alleviating. >> Yeah. >> A little bit. >> Yeah. Would you do it in normal life? >> Like, say that to someone? >> Yeah. >> No. >> What would make you not say it? >> I just don't see how it would do anything. I mean, it'd just make him feel like [ __ ] So, why would I want to make someone feel like [ __ ] >> Yeah. Okay, so why do you want to make yourself feel like [ __ ] >> I don't know. I I guess I'm just used to that. It just happens so automatically. I don't know. Sometimes I don't even realize I'm doing it. >> Yeah, so slow down a little bit and really try to like, what makes it that you want to make yourself feel like [ __ ] >> Guilt. >> Just Yeah. >> Endless guilt. >> Yeah. Yeah. So, all the things that you feel guilty for how many of those things do you think I've done? >> I don't know. All of them. >> Probably. >> Yeah. [laughter] >> Assuming you haven't killed I haven't killed anybody, but >> [laughter] >> Yeah. Yeah. You can make sound. It's better when you make sound. This is movement. You're experiencing the thing you want right now. I'm really sorry that the voice in your head treats you like this. You You don't deserve it, man. It's not okay what it's doing. >> Jesus [clears throat] Christ. >> Right? >> [laughter] >> You really [ __ ] do it, don't you? >> Yes, sir. I do. So, I'm going to give you a couple other interesting things for this cuz I think it'll be useful for a lot of people here who have an abusive voice in their head. We're going to do it again. You're going to talk to me again, Joe. You're going to say the same things that you say to yourself. It can be what you just said. It can be something else that you said to yourself. And but this time I'm going to respond. Okay? And I want you to like react to my reaction as the voice in your head. Do exactly what the voice in your head would do if I if you did this in reaction to it. >> Okay. I think I understand. >> Yeah. >> Uh Joe, would you like get somewhere with this already? Can you >> Ouch. >> Oh. Joe, would you hurry the [ __ ] up? >> Ouch. That hurts. I don't deserve this. >> [sighs and gasps] >> Joe, you can get it [ __ ] right. Do it already. >> Ouch. I don't deserve this. I don't want you to treat me like this. >> [sighs and gasps] >> I don't have any steam to to say that to you anymore. >> [laughter] >> Yeah. So, you get to respond to the voice in your head. That's where the freedom is. You can't stop it, but you can respond to it. And there's like an infinite ways that you can respond to it, but you can actually respond to it. Go ahead. Yeah. Take your time. >> It just keeps coming. That's >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, we're going to play that game just one more time. >> Yeah. >> And [clears throat] this time I'm going to do something just to make a point and you can do it with yourself if you'd like, but just to make a point that the voice in your head is super [ __ ] inaccurate. I don't know you very well, but I'm going to I'm going to even with the little amount I know you, I know that what the voice is saying is super inaccurate. Okay, so I'm going to pretend I'm you. You're going to be the voice in your head. You can use your name instead of my name. And then I'm going to respond. And it's going to be just to show you how inaccurate the voice is. >> Okay, I think I understand. >> Yeah. >> [laughter] >> Maybe I didn't do what I was supposed to. >> You're just saying you're just the voice in your head out loud using your name. And I'm going to pretend I'm you. I'm going to pretend I'm you. >> Um >> Yeah. >> And I was you need to do better. You can do really [clears throat] Come on. >> Hey. I I work out regularly. I have a healthy lifestyle. I'm [ __ ] like I'm in shape for my age. When I walk around, women actually look at me and they're like, "Oh, what's going on over there?" What do you mean? What are you talking about? >> [sighs and gasps] >> No, seriously, what are you talking about? No, give me some evidence. Give me any evidence. >> I don't have any >> [laughter] >> So, what are you doing? Voice in the head, what are you doing? Keep on berating me when it's not even accurate. >> It It just took the wind out of my sails. It's don't Yeah. >> It's really not accurate. You're not stuck. Nobody who's truly stuck shows up here and does what you're doing. >> Yeah. >> Your Your tears show me that you're not stuck. Your body tells me that you take care of yourself. Like you're not unemployed, I'm assuming. And if you are, it's recently unemployed. >> [laughter] >> I I actually uh just took 3 months off because of stuff like this was making it hard to function. So >> Yeah. How Yes. [laughter] Look at that. You You You made a life of yourself so much that you can take 3 months off to work on yourself. >> Yeah. >> That's a huge amount of evidence that this voice in your head is absolutely [ __ ] wrong. >> Yeah. >> So, think about the politician that you hate. Think about the I don't care who it is. Just think about that politician you hate. Got him? Her, him, doesn't matter. And now imagine that politician is talking to an audience and the audience is like, "Yeah, that's right. Yeah, uh-huh. Uh-huh. Yeah, totally. Yeah, uh-huh." >> Yeah. >> You're this. You're the audience. >> Oh. >> That voice in your head is the politician spewing lies and you're just nodding along. >> Huh? Okay. >> Yeah, I see that. >> Yeah. So, that gives you three ways that the the negative self-talk doesn't go away in an instant. >> Yeah. >> But, the tricks are how do you respond to it and start to be able to see that it's not true. >> Yeah, how you relate to it. >> Yeah, also see that it doesn't work. Like if you had a boss sitting there doing that to you, you would get really bad performance. >> I would have quit and went to another job. >> Yeah. He Yeah, exactly. If a boss did that to you, you would quit. You would also have bad performance. He That boss would also be inaccurate. But, more importantly, it's repeating itself for 20 years. So, it's really ineffective at getting change. >> 40 years. >> 40 years. Right? >> Yeah. >> So, wait, what did I say? How many years did I say? >> 20. >> 20. Okay. See, that's how much [laughter] you Right? So, So, that That's the That's the thing. It's like it's like, "Hey, this isn't working. It's not accurate. It's mean. >> Yeah, it is. >> Yeah. And you don't deserve it. Okay. >> [snorts] >> I've got no rush, man. >> Huh? >> I've got no rush. >> I'm starting to feel rushed. >> [laughter] >> Again, it's inaccurate. >> It just doesn't shut the [ __ ] up. >> It just doesn't. And that right there, you get to see how ridiculous it is. That laughter just showed me that you can now see like the ridiculousness of that thing. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. What a pleasure to work with you. >> Is this what the Connections course is like cuz I'm taking >> [laughter] >> We do a little something. We do a little something on the voice in your head there. Yeah. >> I'll see you there again, so >> Cool. What a pleasure. >> Thank you, Joe. >> Yeah. Thanks for watching this video. And if you got something out of it and you're interested in learning more, there's really two ways of doing the work. The first is to do the work yourself, which is really powerful. I've done a ton of it, but there's also doing the work with a group of people and that's also incredibly powerful because the stuff that got hurt and injured in us in groups is often best healed in groups and that's why we offer the Connection course. And if you're interested, just click on the link below.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZeIShRO_8NE&t=12s
In all my work with some of the most successful people in the world, one of the things that completely dumbfounds me over and over again is how much their internal critic slows them down and prevents them from having the life that they want. And I see this ubiquitously across almost all humans that I work with, whether it's the thousands of people in our courses or the dozens of people that I get to work with in person, this internal critic has become something that is just stifling their life. and weirdly at the exact same time they think they need it to be productive. So this video we're going to go into where that critic came from, what it is, what's actually going on there, how to work with it, and how that relationship with your internal critic can completely change if you do a few simple things. So before we get into it, let's first define inner critic. So you can call it negative selft talk, you can call it um critical voice in the head, you can just call it negative thoughts that you're having or thoughts that are telling you you have to do something to be better. It might say, "Hey, don't forget to do this. Don't forget to do this. You got to do this. Don't forget to do this while you're doing something." So it's literally nagging you to do something else while you're doing something and it's incessant or it's telling you, "Oh, you're no good. You should die. What's wrong with you? Why did you screw that up?" or it's constantly going back over the past saying, "Why didn't you do it this way? Why didn't you do it that way? Why didn't you do it this way? Or you could do this better? Why are you 40 years old and you don't have a job? Why is it that you're 40 years old and you don't have a house? Why don't you have a girlfriend?" And so it's just whack, whack, whack over and over again with this negative self-t talk. So that's the thing that we're talking about. We're talking about having that voice in your head that's constantly riding you. I was driving with my daughter and she was like nine or ten years old and we're driving along and we do these road trips every it used to be every six months I would take each one of my daughters on a road trip just the two of us so that we could have this time to connect and we were listening to the podcast on the voice in the head and I had to listen to it to see if it was okay for publishing and she was listening to me and she goes I know where my voice in the head comes from it comes from my teacher and my grandma her grandma and her teacher were the people she spent spent the most time with besides her mom and I. And their voice, their criticism landed in her head and she could identify it because it spoke like the grandmother. It spoke like the teacher. It had the same tone. It had the same words. So if you really want to like figure out where yours came from, just like one day sit down and write everything it says to you for like 30 minutes and then say, "Who said that to me as a kid?" And that'll give you a pretty good flavor of where it came from. which means you're listening to the voice in your head thinking that it's you talking to you, but it's not you talking to you, it's somebody else talking to you. It's like an old tape of somebody talking to you and and you're talking to yourself like you're three or four years old, right? You're not talking to yourself like you're a full- grown adult, which is amazing when you think about it that way. Now, now the next thing that happens is once you kind of see where it's coming from, then you say, "Well, I need it. I need the negative selft talk because who would I be without it?" Like if I don't have this negative selft talk, I'm just going to hang out on the couch and drink beer and watch television. I need it to be motivated. So let me prove to you that that is just absolutely not the case. So imagine you're at work and your boss shows up and hangs out about 2 feet away from you is like, "Oh no, don't do it that way. Do it this way. No, you did that wrong. Oh wait, be careful for that. You know, you should also be fixing this light over there and talking to you every like two seconds, giving you another little bit of criticism. Don't forget this. Don't forget that. Don't forget this. So, do you think you'd do a great job? You think that would make you more productive? Do you think that is the kind of boss you want? Most people would say, "No, I'm quitting if I have a boss like that." But somehow or another, I need my internal boss to act just like that. I couldn't have a bossless consciousness and be able to be productive. But what actually happens is when that voice starts changing starts slowing down even can go away that negative selft talk all of a sudden you have so much more energy because you're not constantly under attack your adrenal system isn't constantly oh my gosh oh my gosh oh my gosh I've done something wrong I've done something wrong I've done something wrong and so you get a lot of energy you become much more productive now the next piece is to see how you're typically reacting to the talk to the negative selft So, typically, think about it this way. Think about the politician you hate the most, right? There's a politician you hate the most. And then that politician has like 500 believers at a rally and the politician talks and the believer is like, "Yeah, yeah, that's true. That's true. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah." That's how most people relate to the critical voice in their head. The critical voice in the head said something and they're like, "Yep, that's true. Yes, I should remember to do that. Yes, I should be doing the plumbing and the electrical at the same time. Yes, I did make a mistake. Yes, I could have said it better. Yes, I They're just agreeing with everything that the negative selft talk is saying, which is ridiculous when you think about that. The negative selft talk is talking to an eight-year-old version of you or a four-year-old version of you. And it's not even you talking to yourself. It's a programming that's talking to you. And so the quickest way to change how the voice in the head works with you, it isn't to try to change it. Trying to resist the negative selft talk actually typically only makes it grow. It is to change the way you relate to it. So here's a simple experiment you can run at any time. It's really easy is you can just say ouch. If you can sit down, close your eyes, listen to the voice in your head, speak whatever it says out loud, and then just say ouch after everything that it says that's at all critical. And that does two things. So, first is neurologically speaking, if we have a thought and it's just inside and we don't speak it, it only activates our prefrontal cortex. But if we speak it, it activates other parts of our brain. So, when we speak the internal critic, we all of a sudden can hear it in a different light. like, "Holy crap, that's abusive as shit." Like, you'll just hear it and you'll be like, "What is going on?" Like, "I would never talk to a friend like this ever." And so, that's an amazing thing to just speak it out loud, but then to say, "Ouch," after every time. So, you can actually see like own how abusive this the selft talk is that you wouldn't say it to a friend, you wouldn't say it to your kid, you wouldn't say it to your boss, and yet somehow it's okay to say it to yourself. And so, but there's a ton of ways you can relate to it. And I really recommend experimenting with different ways to relate to it. So, maybe your voice in your head tells you 20 times a day you should be skinnier. So, one time, one day, every time it says you should be skinnier, tell it to go [ __ ] itself. And then next day, every time it tells you to be skinnier, you can say, "Oh, I see how scared you are. I'm right here with you." And then the next time it tells you to be skinnier, you can be like, "Should I be skinnier or should I be fatter?" You know, like whatever. I don't really care what you do. Just react differently to it. Realize that you have flexibility with the negative selft talk that it isn't your master. It isn't something that gets to control what you are and what you do. You get to relate to it in different ways. That's a really great way to start working with the voice in your head. Another thing that's really important to see is that you are not the voice in your head, right? That your the voice in your head is caring for you. It's very dysfunctionally caring for you. It's caring for you in a way that's really really not good. It's like really really dirty fuel, right? But it is there is care. If it's saying be careful of that thing, it's because it doesn't want you to get hurt. If it's saying you could have done that better, it's because it wants you to improve. Like it it's it's got love in there somewhere in there. Just like your parents had, there was some love. Just like the teacher had for my daughter, it had some love, right? There there's something there. The grandmother, there's there's care. It's just all fakata, right? And you took on that voice from your teacher or from your parents or whatever because you were trying to figure out, oh, how do I not get in trouble? How do I survive? But now you can't really get in trouble that same way. Like, yeah, you get to make mistakes. Like, here's the crazy thing. Your voice in your head has probably told you that you've made 2,000 mistakes this year, and yet here you are watching a video. Life seems to be pretty good. How's that happen? Like, how does it happen that all those mistakes that you made and still you're doing okay? We don't ever think about it that way. And so, it's really critical for you to just be able to see through the voice in your head that it is not you. It is a program. And though it cares for you, though it's trying, it's not effective. One of my favorite ways of reacting to the voice in the head is just to say, "Oh, wow. That's a really horrible way to manage me. That just doesn't work very well." And I can prove that it doesn't work. You've been telling me to do the same thing for a decade and I haven't done it. Like, you know, you've been telling me to get skinnier for a decade and I haven't done it. You've been telling me to be smarter for a decade and I haven't done it. You've been telling me to like not speak. so much and I haven't done it. So like you suck at managing people like so let's not do that. So really important to take this whole thing like lightly. It's it's like oh it's just there's actually a comical nature to it. One of my favorite quotes is Voltater and he and he says God is a comedian playing to an audience that's too afraid to laugh. Like if you really take a look at the voice in the head for a minute, you're like, "Okay, I am listening to something that was programmed into me when I was 7 years old, four years old. And I am still taking the advice of that person even though I wouldn't put up with it in a boss, even though I wouldn't speak to anybody else like that. I'm taking that advice and I'm buying it all wholesale. and I feel like I'm oppressed and I have to do the thing that it says even though I don't do the thing that it says. I'm actually being passive aggressive with it and telling it like quietly. You're giving it a quiet little I'm not going to do what you say to do. You have this whole rebell like that's hilarious if you really think about that for a second. It's it's it's comical. And if you can see the the self-t talk is comical like, "Oh, look at you. Look at you. I see you're trying to not get in trouble. I see that it's like there's this deep care and at the same time it is like watching like a three-year-old try to explain to you why the moon exists. It just it's there's a there's a cuteness to it. There's like a there's a comedy to it. And if you can start seeing the voice in your head that way, then there's so much progress that can be made in your life. so much so many ways that you can see that like oh I don't have to live in this cage that I've made for myself with this little tyrant in my head that I don't actually have to listen to anymore. And the cool thing is we get to see this all the time like when we we do something even in the connection course we one of the things we do is we start addressing the voice in the head and it is so cool to watch people go oh crap like they they Wow. I'm like, that's how I'm treating myself. I would never treat anybody else that way. And to have that felt experience of it because you're doing the voice in the head with somebody else. It's an amazing experience to just watch so many eyes light up. It's like the Wizard of Oz that at some point this big thing that's huffing and puffing and blowing smoke and there's just this little thing behind the curtain. And when people see it, the freedom that they get is it's just amazing.


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eX4d7wIOvuM&t=1s
If you want immediate tricks to reduce your stress right now, this is a great video to watch. In this video, I sit with a woman and we talk about the tricks to immediately get less stressed and how to dismantle the inner critic that inevitably makes that stress come back. And along the way, you'll be invited to do some experiments. There's dozens of ways to reduce stress right now. I mean, for instance, hum. Let's take a minute and we'll just hum for a second. [Music] I mean, that's just one of the most silly but simple ways to do it. It stimulates the vagus nerve, so that reduces stress. But also, you'll notice that the brain stopped a lot of what it was doing while you were humming. That's a simple one. Another easy way to reduce stress is to just take your hand, put it on anything and feel the texture. Move your hand and feel the texture. Yeah, you can see that, right? You can put all of your attention on the bottom of your feet. You just keep as much of your attention as possible on the bottom of your feet. You can take a moment and listen to the words that I'm saying, but instead of listening to my words, listen to the silence that's around my words in between my words, the higher frequencies, the lower frequencies that are all silent right now. And pay attention to those. Boom. Immediately. So, what this is called in nervous system language is downregulating your nervous system. There is literally an infinite number of ways to do it. And the problem is often is that you can downregulate yourself out of stress, but it doesn't actually handle the underlying issues. But it's really useful, super useful. You don't want to not use this tool. There's a lot of times where that downregulation is absolutely necessary, but you can start downregulating yourself completely into almost like a drugged stuper where you're not actually addressing issues. It becomes an act of avoidance, but it's a really important tool. And so there's literally infinite forms of this. And they come in about three categories. One is breath. There's a five and a half second breath or six breath which is just breathing in for six seconds, breathing out for six seconds or five and a half seconds. This is like a super simple one. There's box breathing, that's another one. There's humming, that's another one. There's putting all of your attention on the way that the breath feels going in and out of your nose. All of these things can help you downregulate, can help you sleep, can help you prepare for sleep. And so they're incredibly useful. Another one that's not breath related is sensation related, which is how do I feel the senses? It's I call coming to your senses. So here's a quick lesson for coming to your senses. And this is something that you can do anywhere at any time. And it's just great to do when you're stressed. So, just take a deep breath. Make a little sound on your exhale. And your job is just to put your attention on the sensations on the outside of your body. Now, if you need to, you can just put your hand and rub it on your leg and just pay attention to where it feels on your fingertips and your leg, your pants or skirt. Or you can wiggle your toes and notice how the soles of your feet and your soles of your toes feel against the bottom of your shoe or the floor. Or you can just feel how the air feels on your skin. Or you can put your hands together and just rub your thumbs together slowly. And you'll notice that already your nervous system is more calm already. Everything is less stressful. It took about a minute. And all that's required is that you slow down and feel the sensations on the outside of your body. You can even create them. You just have to feel them and then boom, things are calmer. Slowly feel the sensations. So, it's really nice to get into the pattern of doing these things when a certain thing triggers it. the same way that you would do coffee, right? You wake up in the morning and you walk past the coffee place, you smell the coffee, you go in and you get the coffee. It's like, "Oh, I'm I know that I get frustrated when I call up the help desk and the person, you know, doesn't understand me and they never help me out." So, as I'm dialing, I'm just these little tricks to downregulate yourself. The thing to watch out for, like I said, is that it can also be an act of avoidance, right? So, what I've noticed, I was working with a CEO the other day and they were working on getting angry at meetings. They didn't want to be getting angry at meetings or frustrated. And this is a CEO who does not show the frustration. So, he may be frustrated, but it's not like he's yelling or abusive, but it throws him all day. And so, he's like, I don't want to be frustrated. So, we were learning some of these down reggulation techniques and he's like, "Oh, that's great. I'm Nope. Frustration's back and and it's cuz he wasn't using it as a way to get rid of the frustration." He could do that and then it becomes even more dangerous. But what he noticed is the the natural thing which is the underlying issue isn't going to get resolved by downregulating. Downregulating might help you find a solution. It might it might help you take the right action. It might help you get into a a greater sense of yourself, a more space to be able to take the action that's going to most benefit you. But it isn't the action that's going to actually take care of the stressor. It isn't seeing through the thought. So for you to really understand and see through the thoughts that you're having, the first thing you have to do is be aware of the thoughts that you're having. And that's what this exercise is about. So for five minutes you're going to narrate out loud every thought that you have in your head. Now you can record this which will be useful so you can hear it in the future or you can not record it and record it later if you'd like. But you can just talk out loud every thought that you have. And so maybe your thought is I need to get to work. Maybe your thought is I should stop watching YouTube videos. Maybe your thought is you should be prettier. Maybe your thought is I need to do the dishes. Whatever your thought is, it doesn't matter. Your job is to just say whatever thought you have out loud. Every thought you have out loud for the next five minutes. That's it. And you'll start to be aware of how you're talking to yourself and how quickly you're talking to yourself. It's best to use the tone and quality of the voice that is speaking. So you're not speaking in a different tone than what you hear. You're speaking in the exact same tone as what you hear. Okay, go ahead and get started. One of the biggest, if not the biggest cause of stress in the system is the internal critic. That is the repetitious voice in your head that keeps on criticizing you all the time. And I think it was a Mayo Clinic, maybe it was a Cleveland Clinic that has something on the web that says that we have 50 to 60,000 thoughts a day, right? And most of them aren't novel. They're not, oh, here's how to invent electricity, you know, or oh, here's what I should do around AI for my business. Most of them are you should do this, you should do this, you should do this, you should do this, you should do this, you should do this, or why aren't you why haven't you lost weight, why haven't you lost weight or you have to quit drinking or just a repetition of criticism that's happening. Even if it's you can do this, you can do this, you can do this, that's assuming that you actually can't do it and you need a pep talk, which is another form of criticism. So the the voice in the head is just this internal stack of criticism. The other way to think about it, it is an internal stack of attack is just whack whack whack whack whack. And that is stressful. If you had a boss who was hanging out and just like right over your shoulder, no, don't type that way. No, type this way. Are you doing enough? You have to do this other thing, too. And just hitting you like that 60,000 times a day. It would be so stressful. You would be, "Oh, please." You'd kill him, kill yourself, kill, you know, it'd just be horrible. But we're living with that all the time. And and that's abusive. And if you can really see the abuse of that, you can understand why there's just so much stress in life. And you'll notice that people who have different voices in their head have different levels of stress in their life for sure. So there's a couple questions about, well, how do I address that? And the first one though is just to know that it's possible for that critical voice in the head to almost completely go away or just be very silent. Another thing that you can do that's really useful is to realize that the voice isn't yours. You will notice that the voice in your head that's critical sounds a lot like somebody, your mom or your dad or your grandmother or a teacher in fifth grade or whatever that is. But wherever it comes from, you'll get this thing about you'll see, oh, this isn't mine. this is talking to me. I don't have to believe it. And that's the second thing you can do about the critical voice in your head is you start to realize that if it was a politician, you were you would be an acolyte. You'd be the person who listens to the politician goes, "Yeah, everything that guy says. Yeah. Yeah. I believe all of that. Yeah. Yeah. And then you can realize, oh, I can have a different relationship with it. What it says isn't true. what it says is just a a repeating pattern of something that somebody else believed in my past and then that gives you this framework of oh I have a whole another set of options about how to relate to it. So critical voice speaks and you can say, "Yeah, that's true." Or you can say, "Hey, that's a pretty crappy way to manage me. Could you try another way?" Or you could say, "Oh, I see that you love me and that you're caring for me, but not like that." Or you could say, "Yeah, I see that you're really scared and I'm going to be right here with you." You can respond to the voice in the head in lots of different ways to reduce that stress. So, here's an exercise you can take with you. You're going to do the exact same experiment you did before where you are speaking all the things the voice in your head says out loud. This time you're definitely going to record it and then you are going to have that written up on a document using AI or you're going to write it yourself. And then next to each one of the things you say you're going to write down where you learned it from. particularly the critical ones. Where did you learn that you weren't pretty enough? Where did you learn that you needed to work harder? Where did you learn that you messed up at the last conversation? Like, where did you learn those things? And you're just going to write down who gave you this critical voice in the head. If you found this video helpful, please subscribe. And if you want more tools for reducing stress, you can go here or click on the link below.


https://www.artofaccomplishment.com/podcast/who-is-the-voice-in-your-head-3
Summary

Most of us have a voice in our heads constantly narrating our experiences. Have you ever noticed what yours is like? How it talks to you? How would you feel is someone else spoke to you the way that this voice speaks to you? Would you speak to someone else this way? Today we are going to explore how the voice in our head influences what we say, do and feel. We will learn how we can develop a new relationship with it.
Transcript

Episode intro:  

You have this deep, critical voice in your head. It is like you are living with a horrible, micromanaging boss all the time. We know what that´s like if we are actually sitting next to one of those people and they are constantly barraging us, and yet we just think it is normal when it is coming from ourselves.  

Welcome to the Art of Accomplishment, where we explore how deepening connection with ourselves and others leads to creating the life we want with enjoyment and ease.

My name is Brett Kistler. I am an adventurer, entrepreneur and a self exploration enthusiast.  I am here with my co-host, Joe Hudson. Joe is a business coach who has  spent decades working with some of the world´s top executives and teams developing a unique model of human patterns that underpin how we operate with ourselves, each other and the world. A good entry point into this model is a mindset called VIEW, vulnerability, impartiality, empathy and wonder.  

Through understanding and cultivation we learn to easefully drop into the VIEW state of mind, deepening self awareness and increasing our connection with the world around us. To learn more about this podcast or courses, visit artofaccomplishment.com  

Most of us have a voice in our heads constantly narrating ourselves.  

[Whispers: Why did you say that? She hates me. Get it together. Get it together.]

Have you ever noticed what yours is like? How it talks to you? How would you feel if someone else spoke to you the way this voice speaks to you? Would you speak to someone else in this way?

Today we are going to explore how the voice in our head influences what we say, do and feel and explore how to develop a new relationship with it. Joe, what is the voice in the head?

Joe: The voice in the head. Let's make a distinction. There's a voice in your head, which is the thing you can hear talking to yourself. It's kind of the editor that’s constantly happening, that’s judging your situation, wondering what people are thinking about you, telling you what to do, telling you how to do it. I would make a distinction here that there’s the voice in your head that is repetitive, and the voice in your head that is unique or inspirational.  

Neurologically speaking, they say that we have about 50,000 thoughts a day that happen. That's the voice in your head. Most of those for most people, the voice is saying the same thing over and over again. You should lose weight. You should lose weight. Or why are you drinking so much coffee? Stop drinking so much coffee. It's a repetitive voice in the head.  

When I am speaking about the voice in the head in the context of working with people, I am talking about the repetitive, bossy, critical voice in the head.  

Brett:  Let´s take a moment to help tap into their voice in the head right now. If it is 50,000 thoughts a day, it must be accessible at any time.

Joe: Yeah, that's great. So a wonderful way to do this is to just be silent for the next, say, 20 to 30 seconds and stop thinking. [silence] In that time period, a thought arose, and maybe the thought was how long will this silence last or this is stupid. What makes us do this? Or I hope I didn't forget the eggs in the oven, whatever. That's the voice in the head. That's what it is. It's the constant thinking that goes on, and for most people it is very auditory. It is very word focused. For some people, it is more somatic. It is more body focused. But the grand majority of people, literally it is like they can hear the voice.

Brett:  I felt both. As the silence went on, I started to feel a little bit of tension in my body, and then the thought that popped up was I wonder how much dead space we should have in a podcast before we lose people's attention.  

Joe: Perfect. Both are always happening. There's somatic. That's not exactly true. There's always the somatic experiencing that's occurring. You cannot stop that, and then oftentimes there are thoughts that go with it. The tricky part is that the more you become aware of the voice in your head, the more you become aware of what it is saying. Oftentimes, when people first get confronted with the idea, they might not think they have many thoughts in their head and the voice in the head isn't very active, and then the more they pay attention to it, the more they realize it is constantly humming along back there.

Obviously, there are people who do a tremendous amount of meditation or different practices where the voice in the head is far more silent, particularly the reoccurring voice in the head is far more silent and quiet. That in itself is an interesting thing, because the somatic experiencing hasn't stopped, and so to some degree it is harder to find the pain that's occurring. The voice makes it much easier to feel that pain or to see the dysfunction of the way the voice happens. It is harder to understand it or see it or work with it, if it is just a somatic experience.

What I notice is the more you become aware of it, the more sensitive you are to it. The more sensitive you are to it, the more you realize what it is saying and how it is saying it. A great example of that, I did a ton of meditation in my earlier years. A point came along where the voice in the head cut by like 75%. I felt like it was gone for a while as far as the recurring negative, looping thoughts. Over time, I have noticed, “Oh no, there are still things there that took me a while to notice.” Just the thing that's always saying, “Have you done this, have you done this, have you done this.”

It's just a matter, like anything, it is subtle until you see it. The more sensitive you become to it, the more you become aware of how much it is affecting your day to day, minute to minute life.  

Brett:  What makes it important or interesting to become aware of it? I imagine if I had a roommate in my head just constantly talking to me, ignorance would be bliss. What makes it worthwhile to start paying attention and noting what it is saying, if what it is saying can be so self-critical and distracting?

Joe: There are a couple of reasons. One is because it is the first step to a different relationship to it. In my first experience of really becoming aware of it, I was reading a psychology book on Gestalt. It was Fritz Perls, I believe, and he was talking about how there was an upper dog and an underdog in your internal dialogue. The upper dog was like the bully telling you what to do, criticizing you, and then the underdog was the one rebelling against that, which is a much more subtle, quiet voice that it often takes years for people to get in touch with and experience.

Just being aware of it, just being aware. For me, in particular, it was the should thing. I think he called it out. When you tell yourself you should do something, that's the upper dog. Just by recognizing it and seeing it every time it came, it just started to become quieter and quieter. Just the recognition of the voice in the head can change the way the voice in the head dialogues with you, until you resist it, until you are like, “Oh man, I have got to change that voice in my head.” Then the voice in the head is now telling you to change the voice in your head, and that resistance makes the voice in your head persist.

But just the simple awareness of it, just like the gentle, there it is doing that thing again, can reduce it. So then the question of course is, “Why would I want to reduce this voice in my head?” There are a ton of reasons for that. A very active, negative voice in the head is in the DSM called dysthymia. The definition of low-level depression is this constant, negative self-talk. That's one reason. Another reason is, because life is just far more enjoyable and sweet when your consciousness isn't a horrible boss.  

On one level, you said if my roommate was like that, I would rather just not hear them. The truth is when you have this deep, critical voice in your head, it is like you are living with a horrible micromanaging boss all the time. We know what that’s like if we are actually sitting next to one of those people and they are constantly barraging us, and yet we just think it is normal when it is coming from ourselves. Just the joy and bliss of life as that voice changes or as your relationship to it changes, it totally can transform how much joy and happiness and ease and clarity you can have.

Brett:  Somebody I was talking to recently about the voice in the head, they said their voice isn't a self-critical voice, but what they do is they rehearse conversations they could have had. It seems like that is a way of being self-critical. The fact that you would rehearse a conversation you have already had about how you could do it better comes from self criticism, and then self-criticism is shaping the thoughts of what you thought you should have said. What are some of the other ways that the voice can show up in people if somebody is listening to this and they are not connecting with this idea of there being a voice in their head that's critical of themselves or the upper dog, as you put it?

Joe: Constantly telling you things to do, shoulding you, wondering about what other people think of you incessantly or even just more than once, rehearsing and trying to make sure you get perfect at something before you actually go and live it. All of those are great examples of how the voice in the head can work. There's a multitude of ways it can work, and it is quite cool in the way that it finds its new home when you have spotted one. Like I said before, you can be saying the should thing, I understand that. I don't want that, so I am just going to be aware of it. Then pretty soon the voice in the head becomes the aggressor to the voice in the head itself. It's amazing how it can just find it's new natural home.

In Zen, they talk about trying to use the voice in the head to get rid of the voice in the head. I am paraphrasing here, but to use the voice in the head to get out of the voice in the head is like asking a thief to be the security of your house. It doesn't work.

Brett:  Yeah, the voice isn't you, and the voice speaking to the voice is also not you. All of it is just in the way of your impulse. What that kind of brings me to is one of the characteristics of the voice is that it seems to be slowing us down, either by pulling us out of the present into the past or the future, trying to solve some unsolvable puzzle, or the self-criticism in it can just inhibit us from taking steps that may be imperfect, but are steps or speaking what's true for us in the moment without imposing a lot of restraints around what people might think or what might be wrong about it.  

Joe: Yeah, I mean just a great way to think about this is so the voice in your head has worried about how some future things are going to go, maybe a job interview or maybe a first date. If you think about all the worrying that you did and all the scenarios that it went through and all the things you thought you were going to say and all of the ways you were going to behave, how much of that was actually pertinent, how much of that was actually useful energy, how much of that actually helped you prepare, and how much of it just did nothing and was just a waste of time. How much of it actually hurt?

I see oftentimes when people are rehearsing things over and over and over again, it builds up such an anxiety around the actuality of the thing happening that they are not there in present with what's occurring in front of them when the time to rehearse is over.  

Brett:  My experience of that is, it also sets up for major disappointment and a shame spiral after the conversation doesn't go anything according to your rehearsal.  

Joe: That's a characteristic of the voice in the head, actually, to create the reality it is trying to avoid. Give an example of a perfectionist, and having the voice in the head trying to convince you that you need to be perfect about something. That incessant nature makes it very hard to even do something really well. That's why you see so many artists get hooked on heroin or alcohol, anything that just silences the voice in their head so they can be in that flow state so they can create their best work.

It's no different than doing a PowerPoint presentation or making a speech, or having a great first date. It's about being present in the moment, and being true to yourself in that moment.

Brett:  In an even more diffuse way, just sitting down and looking at a blank page or a blank canvas and feeling just that slight negative emotion of like uh, whatever my brushstroke is about to be is going to be wrong. Whether or not that's even a voice. I've always felt that present in anything that I am doing to some extent and most of the time just didn't notice it, and many times just didn't take action on things that I wanted to do or would have loved to have done, but just didn't notice that I didn't do them, because I avoided feeling that feeling. Then I avoided feeling that I had felt that feeling, and that's why I didn't do the thing I wanted and then justified it for some other reason. I just didn't have time.

Joe: That's a great example. It could just be a feeling. Then if you stop and say, “Hey, what's the message behind that feeling?”, then you will be more aware of the voice. Oftentimes for different people they will be more aware of the feeling or more aware of the voice, and they are often in concert. The voice can be really subtle, or the feeling can be seemingly very subtle, just like the voice can seemingly be very subtle.

Brett:  When you start noticing this voice and you start paying more attention and noting it, what are some tips for not getting into a resistance battle with it, but also not buying into everything it says, which is I guess is what we do by default when we are not noticing there's a voice.  

Joe: That's the thing. The thing about having no awareness of the voice and it is happening– Even in this moment, I have awareness of the voice happening. In this moment, I don't. When we are not noticing it is happening, it is far more likely to control what we are doing. That's a really good point you just made. There are so many ways. There is a plethora of ways of working with the voice in your head.

One whole category of ways to work with the voice in your head is just to ask how you relate to it. Voice in the head says, “You should have done better in that project!”, so some ways to relate to it would be, “Okay, fine.” and then a subtle, “Fuck you!”, in response to it. Another way to relate to it is, “I see that you really care that I do a good job and I would love to ask you to use better management techniques with me.” Another way to deal with it is to practice silence. Another way to deal with it is to love it. Another way to deal with it is to tickle it. Another way to deal with is it to really get in a massive fight with it and then see what happens when you are exhausted from that fight.  

The main thing here that I really recommend is to play and to experiment. Oftentimes the underlying assumption is, there is this voice. A, it is never going to change, and B, there is nothing I can do about it. C, it will always be there. What if it is like, “I am going to do a series of experiments with the voice in my head? I am going to play with it in different ways. I am going to laugh at it hysterically one day, and I am going to just notice it another day. I am going to love it the third day.” There is so much flexibility in it, but there is something in our system that is so scared of having that voice in the head go away or to change that it convinces us that we have no flexibility or no options around the voice in the head.  

Brett:  When I have heard other people describe this in other books or other work, and there is even a little bit of it in this conversation, there is an assumption that the voice itself is not valuable. It would be better if we didn't have it. Here´s a bunch of strategies to get rid of it. But I am curious what value there is in that voice, because often the self-criticism that I experience of how I could have done something better is real. It is just that I feel ashamed that I didn't do it that way the first time, but I actually could have done better. Maybe the voice has something valuable to say.

Joe: There is a way of hearing the voice in the head and hearing the intention behind what it is saying, and that's almost always valuable. If you assume for a minute that the voice in the head loves you and it just really has a whole bunch of crappy strategies to love you but it really loves you, then there is a way of listening to everything the voice in the head has to say as a deep care. It is just not doing it really well.  

If I told you you are messing up this podcast, “Hey, you are messing up this podcast, hey, you are messing up this podcast, look. You are still being silent. You are messing up this podcast. Why aren't you saying something, Brett? You are messing up this podcast.” That's not going to make a great podcast. But the deep care behind that is it really wants you to be successful and so getting into a war with the voice in the head is you can't ever win that. The question is what relationship you want with it.

Another cool thing to think about, is oftentimes the voice in the head is talking to itself more than it is talking to you. I am going to let that one sit for a second. It's almost projecting onto you. When the voice in the head is saying you are messing up this podcast, you are messing up this podcast, is it you or the voice in the head that's messing up the podcast?

Brett:  There´s something interesting in that, where the voice in our heads often seems to map onto an actual person in our history or some blur of many people in our history that were caretakers or parents or teachers. A lot of the things that I say to myself in my head are things somebody else might have said to me in the past, and so I´ve just internally learned to say it to myself first before somebody else does it.  

Joe: That's part of the care it has. It is trying to keep you out of trouble. It is trying to keep you from not being insulted, not being chastised, not having to feel the way it felt when you were three years old and being chastised. It often mimics very important figures in our life or it is reacting to very important events in our life. That's definitely how it goes, which is interesting, because oftentimes if we had, let's say, a really critical mom and the mom just really criticizes us, at some point you are like, you are full of it. You don't know what you are talking about. But you don't question your head that way.  

If your mom is constantly like, “You should shave more, you should shave more, you should shave more, you are like, “You are the wrong generation. You don't know.” But if the voice in your head says, “You should shave more, you should shave more, you should shave more.”, you are far more likely to buy into it. But you didn't even choose to program it. You didn't even choose what reality it agrees with. That was chosen for you, and yet humans constantly believe what's going on with the voice in the head, which is another way to relate to it. To actually see through the false logic of the voice in the head. The voice in the head is always contradicting itself. “You were too cocky there. You were too humble there. You spoke too much. You didn't listen enough. You listened too much. You didn't speak enough.”

If you really start looking at how the voice in the head operates, it doesn't give you actually a place to succeed often. There's no way out. There´s a problem with everything, and yet we still buy into it. To really look and find out that there´s a little bit of untruth in everything the voice in the head says, everything the voice in the head says, and to find that, it gives you a lot of freedom and perspective from the voice in the head itself, the recurring negative voice in the head.

Brett:  What about the truth in it? What about the times where if I did say the thing I thought of saying, then I might have lost a client or a partner or angered somebody or gotten judged? How much of it is untrue? How much of it is true?  

Joe: This is an interesting question, right? So let's say you have done something that insulted a client, and let's say the best thing is to say, “Hey, I am really sorry about that. I did that. It's not what I wanted to do. It's not how I want it to be with you, and I apologize.” Then that thing you did wrong can build trust, and can actually make your relationship deeper.

If you are in your head saying, “Wow, you screwed up with a client.”, and that happens once. It's not a reoccurring negative thing, and you immediately take action on it. Then whatever is happening is an effective, efficient cycle, but if you are saying it multiple times and doing nothing about it, or you are saying it 20 times and then doing something about it, that is not an efficient cycle. That's just self-abuse. There is no need for that. It doesn't make you happier. It doesn't improve the relationship. It doesn't make them happier with you. It doesn't build trust. It doesn't add anything there.

The important thing is it is reoccurring, and it is negative self-talk.

Brett:  Something I have noticed is when it is reoccurring, there is often some kind of double bind. There is like I really screwed that up. What I need to say is this, but I already said the other thing and I cannot go back on my word. Now there's sort of a fight between the different versions of the voice.  

Joe: Yeah, exactly. How efficient is that? How is that helpful? Exactly. And there is a wisdom to it, and it is like, “What is it that you want?” “I want a better relationship with him, and I don't want to look like I am inconsistent. I want to be respected by this person.” If you get in touch with that and you just name that, put it in a VIEW frame of mind, it is amazing to say, “Wow, I noticed that I was being inconsistent here. It's now how I want to be you. I always noticed I am having a hard time saying that I was inconsistent, because I am scared you are going to look at me this way or this way. It is more important for me to be in my integrity than to try to look good in front of you. I apologize, and how can we proceed to build trust from here.”

When the voice in the head is abusing like that, what´s occurring is you are creating fear in your system. It is creating an anxiety, and then that anxiety makes you think in a binary way, either apologize or don't apologize. It doesn't give you the whole, vast array of opportunities in front of you at any moment. Also, that anxiety puts it so that you have a false end. The only moment you can see is that moment of apologizing or not apologizing. You are not seeing the whole relationship and how it can get better over time.  

That abuse, that self-abuse, turns into anxiety, and the anxiety prevents us from learning. The anxiety limits our options, the options we can conceive of. The anxiety stops us from seeing a very particular moment. That's another reason why an abusive voice in the head is not effective.

Brett:  That thing you just said, that scenario where you were just speaking to the client was beautiful and I could imagine being– This has happened before where I am like,  “What would Joe say?” I am like I can´t come up with what Joe would say, and I am like  oh. What would I say if I was speaking so clearly from my truth that I don't feel like I have access to because I am under a barrage from of all these different voices. Then nothing gets said.  

The thing you said to me the other day, which was like, life is really great once you realize you are already wrong.  

Joe: Yeah, there´s another thing. What I did when I said, “What is it that I really want?”, and then I spoke the want. What you are doing is saying, in some version of what´s the right thing to say, whether it is through the projection of me or through being completely high integrity. Doing the right thing, trying to make it right, is part of the anxiety.

Brett:  That is the voice. That's what the voice is trying to do. It is trying to make you right. A fear of being wrong.  

Joe: And that's how the voice gets more and more subtle. It sounds like a great thing. What would my highest integrity self say? That sounds like a great thing, but it is still trying to get it right. That's why I said to you, that life is great when you know you are wrong, because then you don't have to try to be right. Then you are just operating from that place naturally, that place of integrity naturally.  

I find the much neater trick is just to say, “What do I want?”, and then speak into that want, which is far more vulnerable than trying to be right.

Brett:  Absolutely. Being right is trying to say or do the thing that is perceived by both the voice in your head and others as everybody agrees that it is right, which is an impossible task.  

Joe: Totally impossible.

Brett:  What you want is something that can flow and change, and it can be true in the moment and you get what you want or not what you want and then learn more.

Joe: That's right. Also, there is this total freedom in identity. If you aren't worried about being right, then you don't need everyone to think you are right and you don't need to be right. There's a huge freedom in that. There's this amazing freedom in it. What's cool is that, if you are there and every time you worry about being right or every time you are wrong and somebody is chastising you for being wrong, and you let that emotion move through, it disintegrates more and more of what some traditions would call the ego, but I would call just limited perspectives. It just starts to disintegrate your limiting perspective, and it allows your identity to be an internal experience of identity to be far more expansive and to need a lot less protection.

[bell]

Okay, so this is the time in our podcast when we do something just a little bit different. We take a break from the intellect and incorporate our bodies and emotions into the conversation. We do this because it helps us integrate the information better, and usually it is a bunch of fun.  

We crowdsource these exercises from our community, so if you have a good one, please share it with us. When doing the exercise, take it as a treat and as an experiment. Just do the activity and see what happens. As always, enjoy yourself.

[bell]

Woman´s voice: Hi everyone. This is Tara. Take a big inhale. You are going to keep your eyes open for this one. Our attention is going to be on our eyes this time. On your next inhale, you can use the inhale to sort of scan if you have any tension around your eyes. You can use the exhale to release any tension around your eyes. See how much you can let your eyes just rest in their sockets.

Many of us carry a lot of tension around our eyes. You can use your breath to continue letting your eyes relax. You are going to let your vision go soft so you are not going to focus on any one thing in front of you, just see how much you can let your vision go soft. Everything may go a little fuzzy. That's okay. Take another inhale.  

I am going to take it one step further. With your eyes deeply resting in their sockets, see how much they can just receive the visual field in front of them. The visual field comes to them and all they have to do is they get to receive the visual field. Just notice how you feel different at the end of this than when you started.  

[bell]

Joe: Welcome back. I hope you enjoyed the exercise as much as we did when we found it. Before we go back into the episode, I wanted to thank all of you who have been sharing the podcast and signing up for the VIEW course. The interest and support you guys have shown has been both overwhelming and humbling. It is a pleasure to know that we have something to offer that has been so helpful to you. All right, now let's get back into the conversation.  

Brett:  I can observe that any of my internal thoughts are actually trying to avoid feeling something. The thought might be self-criticism, which is trying to gain control over myself to avoid feeling whatever I felt by not getting it right in whatever sense. But also rehearsing a conversation or just overthinking about something, a project that I want to do, if I find myself in a circle or a cycle on it, it is often that I am just trying to collapse the discomfort of the unknown into some framework of known. If I am trying to do that, to some extent that's impossible. It will just be an unsolvable puzzle. I will just keep doing it. When, if I just let myself feel the powerlessness of the unknown, then all of a sudden those thoughts go away and I am actually freed up to take action.  

Joe: What's cool about what you just said is, that´s a fractal or a micro version of a major thing that happens, whether it be the fear of death or a fear of taking a risk. To be okay with that feeling of unknown, to be okay with I don't know what's going to happen next, which is true. We think we know what's going to happen next. We get taught over and over again. We don't. We create our world so that we think it is predictable, and then something very unpredictable happens.  

Brett:  Everyone has a plan until you get punched in the face.

Joe: I haven't heard that one.  

Brett: I think it was Muhammad Ali or somebody. Don't quote me on that.  

Joe: There´s another one. I think it was John Lennon, which is, plans are what you do while life is happening. That generally is to be in love with the feeling of confusion and mystery and unknown, and like all emotions, it seems like if we do that, then we don't make plans or if we do that, we won't be prepared. If that's happening, then the voice in the head has convinced you of that through some wonky logic. What actually happens when we get good with that is, that plans happen far more naturally, organically. They flow far easier.

Brett:  This brings up something else, another way that this has shown up in my life as stopping me from moving forward. If I get to the point where I am rehearsing a possible conversation, and then I feel like I have actually fully rehearsed it and then it was perfect, then all of a sudden it becomes completely uninteresting to have that conversation. A, I don't want to break its perfect image in my mind, and B, it becomes boring, because there is no unknown in it. C, sometimes I will actually trick myself into thinking I actually had the conversation. It could be disastrous.  

Joe: Yeah.

Brett:  I can't count how many times I´ve been like, “Wait a minute, didn't we talk about this. No, we didn't talk about this. Oh no.”  

Joe: Those are all the more subtle ways the voice in the head operates. You just kind of described maybe the voice in the head doesn't want to feel or the system doesn´t want to feel rejection, and so the voice in the head starts with, “Let's rehearse so that you don't experience the rejection.” Then the voice is like, “This is boring.”, and then the voice is like, “You probably had the conversation.” That's how the whole thing works. There is always a way for it to insinuate itself, and the more you become aware of it, like I say, it is subtle until you see it. The more you see it, the more depth there is available.  

All that is needed is just to relate to it differently, and to love it and to be aware of it and not have a fight with it. Then you can have moments that happen in your life that feel like big moments. Sometimes and sometimes they don´t.  All of a sudden, you realize the voice in my head is so much quieter. There is so much less of it.  

Brett:  What happens when you get to that point? What did it feel like when you had that 75% reduction of the voice in your head?

Joe: It's different for different people. For some people, it is hardly noticeable. It is such a slow progression. What I notice is, people that were like really deeply depressed and then that kicks in, and then it is just like this life changing, “Holy crap what just happened?” Some people resist it. There is this whole thing called depersonalization disorder. The Zen call it Zen sickness. It can happen, and people are like, “Wait a second, where am I? This isn't good. I need that back.”

You can have all sorts of reactions to it. When it happens and you are aware of it, and you are not fighting with it, it is incredibly joyful. Your car has just become 75% more efficient. Your energy is far more aligned with the way you want to be going, and not second guessing yourself. It is more enjoyable, and you are more in the present, all that stuff.  

Again, to have a goal to get rid of the voice in your head is to not love the voice in your head, and therefore, it is a very slow process. It is far better to just love the voice in your head as it is, and not try to get rid of it and not reject it.  

Brett:  It almost sounds like the framing of getting rid of the voice in the head is creating separation from it, but what we are actually going for is developing such a relationship with it, that it is communicating with us so cleanly that it is just part of us, instead of compressing itself down into words and then hitting us in our logic battlefield.

Joe: Yeah, it is an interesting question. Eventually, that question comes up as you are talking about what is the voice in the head and what´s you. What's the difference between them? I think that´s a great question to be sitting with, but not to be answering. To be in that question, “What's the difference between me and the voice in my head actually?” That in itself can change your relationship with the voice in your head.

Brett:  With that to sit with, what's another practice or maybe a homework assignment to develop this relationship further with our voice?

Joe: There´s an infinite amount. They work differently for different people at different stages. When I see somebody, I can point more directly to what might be useful for them. Generally, there are two that come to mind. One is just tell yourself that you love yourself, maybe in a mirror, in a camera, and then listen to the response to you loving yourself, all the ways it makes you uncomfortable, all the things you say that you are not loveable for. That's all the voice in your head. If you want to excavate it, that´s a great way to excavate it.  

Another one, which is a more subtle trick, is just to ask the question, “What´s looking out behind my eyes right now?” You´ll notice that that often quiets the mind. It also kind of puts you in, where your identity has moved from the voice in your head to awareness. Are you the voice in your head that's constantly talking or are you the awareness of the voice in the head talking? It asks that question, and you can do it at any time. It is a great practice in the fact you can be in a meeting, you can be in a fight, you can be going to the bathroom and you can say what´s looking out behind my eyes.

There's a ton of versions of that question. The most common one is, “Who am I or what am I?” That's not a question to be answered. That´s a question to be in wonder. It's to be in wonder in that question. But there are a ton of little hack questions like that that are available, but I would say start with one of those.  

Brett:  What about journaling? Writing down the voice in your head.  

Joe: I don't have any problem. It is a great thing if you want to write what the voice in the head is saying to you. Great. Bring it into awareness. Even better, once you have done it, be an argumentative lawyer to it. Not an adversary, but an argumentative lawyer and find out what´s a little untrue in each of the statements. Someone says I should lose weight. You should lose weight. According to who? What do you mean by should? Shouldn´t you be the weight you are, because the definition of should is what is, right? I have to lose weight because if not, I´ll die early. What makes dying early bad? Who is to say that the best thing isn't for me to die early?

I know that's crazy, but look for any way in which the logic might be. Also, I should lose weight. I´ve been saying it for a decade. It doesn't work, so what makes me keep on saying I should lose weight. Maybe I should say I want to lose weight. What's the response to I should lose weight. Most people's response is rebellion. They don't do it. There's all sorts of ways to just start looking into and analyzing and bringing a fresh perspective into the voice in your head.  

Brett:  It seems like the example you just gave, somebody asking those questions would get themselves more in touch with what they are actually afraid of underneath the judgement the voice had.

Joe: You can bring VIEW from the first podcast and from the course. You can bring that same methodology and point it towards the voice in your head. Being vulnerable with it. “Ow, it really hurts when you tell me I should lose weight.” Being impartial with it, “I am not going to try to get rid of you. What's going on? What do you really have to say?” Being empathetic with it, “How scared is the voice in the head to be shouting at you like this? What is it so afraid of?” To feel that, to bring wonder to it. You can bring all of that VIEW to your voice in your head, and you can dialogue with it in a journal. It is a great practice.  

There's really infinite ways to deal with it, to play with it, to have fun with it, and I just encourage people to experiment, play.  

Brett:  It seems like a great internal playground for VIEW, and then you might find that the same kind of VIEW conversations you start to have with the voice in your head are going to probably be somewhat similar to the conversations you might have with your first VIEW conversations with your family or your parents, or your family of origin where many of the voices come from.  

Joe: It will also affect all of your relationships. If you see through your own shoulds, and somebody says, I really think I should, you see through their should, whereas if you believe your should, then you believe their should. If you believe your sense of rigid morality, then that is inhumane, then you will believe their sense of rigid morality that is not humane.

When you see through your own voice in your head, you are a bastion of freedom for people, because when they are talking to you, you don't buy into their limiting perspectives.  

Brett:  To wrap this up, can you ask a couple questions for our listeners to ponder, to integrate this conversation.

Joe: How do you want to relate to the voice in your head? What's the most fun experiment you can think to do around the voice in your head? What would it take for you to enjoy the voice in your head just as it is, without wanting it to change?

Brett:  Perfect. Thank you, Joe. I really loved this conversation.

Joe: I really liked it. It felt really alive.  

Thanks for listening to The Art of Accomplishment.  If you enjoyed what you heard today, please subscribe & rate us in your podcast app. We would love your feedback, so feel free to send us questions and comments. To reach out to us, join our newsletter, or check out our courses at artofaccomplishment.com